oh well in on a on a you know thinking
about maybe not quite the absurd but
thinking about these different ways of
of producing and and expanding outwards
um our next presentation comes from
Vernell a a Noel
um Vernell is uh is an architect design
scholar artist Ted speaker and director
of the situated computation and Design
Lab at the Georgia Institute of
Technology where she investigates
traditional and automated making human
computer interaction interdisciplinary
creativity and their intersections with
Society her scholarship and expertise
include design in the Trinidad Carnival
craft practices architecture and art she
builds new Expressions tools and
methodologies to explore social cultural
and political aspects of making
computational design and emerging
technology for new Social and Technical
reconfigurations of design practice
pedagogy and Publix
her work is situated at the intersection
of computation ethnographic inquiry and
critical practice where she interrogates
socio-cultural and socio-technical
issues in computation and computational
Technologies in design and making her
recent scholarship brings together
methods and Concepts from Craft human
computer interaction and media studies
as well as Science and Technology
studies a scholar committed to fostering
inclusive and minority perspectives on
design making and Technology Noel
conducts workshops and gives talks on
design computation extensively across
the globe her work is Thoroughly
interdisciplinary with training and
architecture design computation science
technology and STS studies Media Arts
and Sciences as well as Arts education
her research has been supported by the
Graham foundation for advanced studies
in the Fine Arts the Mozilla Foundation
ideas to Innovation and many more Dr
Noel is a recipient of the 2021 digital
Futures Young Award for exceptional
research and scholarship in the fields
of critical computational design
currently an assistant professor in the
School of Architecture and the school of
interaction Computing she teaches
courses in design computation and
architecture and without further Ado I
will switch over to Vernell
hi everyone my name is Vernal Noel and
I'm a computational designer a maker a
scholar architect and artist
I'm also the director of the situated
computation and Design Lab at Georgia
Tech an interdisciplinary research lab
at the intersection of Design Technology
architecture art designs and engineering
in my work I conduct Research into four
food and with making I examine
traditional making practices and
cultures digital practices and cultures
and their intersections with Society
I was asked this question as a prompt
and I found it very provocative and I'll
answer it throughout my presentation
today Prince most meaningful to my wood
at this time
my current work examines cultural design
and making practices props and
Technology what's most meaningful at
this time is repairing that being
restoring remediating and reconfiguring
design and art in cultural and craft
practices that are dying dormant why
risk
some of the problems I address in my
work include The Disappearance or
Eurasia of craft and cultural knowledges
practices and communities two your
mission of craft cultural or the
exclusion of these knowledges and
communities from technological
discourses and three understanding the
effects of craft and computation
alongside human welfare
motivations for this work include the
creation of space for participation by
those missing two irresisting of
segregation and privileging of certain
types of intelligences and skills and
three the amplify the stories of
historically excluded or marginalized
groups
my focus over the past 14 years has been
the cultural practice of the Trinidad
Carnival
French Frances introduced Carnival to
Trinidad in 1780. Adolfo Africans
engaged in carnival festivities during
their enslavement after slavery was
abolished in 1834 a reinvented the
carnival to express their creativity
their freedom their aesthetic
sensibilities and to reclaim their
Humanity in the face of a system that
considered them less than human
while Europeans participated in carnival
for fun and frailing for those of
African descent Carnival was a religion
and a psychological release of tensions
from domination segregation and the
violent inhumane systems of control
this is an engraving from eating eats of
Carnival celebrations in the capital
city of Port of Spain
now the term Trinidad Carnival or
Carnival or Trinidad and Tobago Carnival
does not define the Carnival's
geographic location but instead its
origin and the main elements that Define
the carnival
the three million elephants Define the
Trinidad Carnival are mass or masquerade
Calypso and Soca music which is the
music and where the media and Tobago and
the steel pan or steel drum which is a
musical instrument invented in the 1930s
in Trinidad and Tobago by the African
working class from old discarded on
drugs
there are more than 70 diasporary
carnivals around the globe in the U.S
the UK several parts of the Caribbean
and these are images of Juve one aspect
of the carnival which originates from
the celebration of resistance and
emancipation from enslavement from the
dangerous cruel forced development
in addition to Carnival being about
celebrating resistant and emancipation
Carnival is also a space of Joy
creativity and innovation
it's a space where people socially
interact and their feelings of
togetherness during this meeting and
designing activities and Carnival
there's mentoring and cooperation with
people learning how to socialize respect
each other respect the Arts and artists
and there's Community engagement with
practitioners doing activities that keep
their community and keep different
communities together
is also consuming with people creating
and performing
histories imagination social and
political topics for competitions and
masquerades on the left is consuming
from the 1950s when they write from
2016.
and in addition to costuming we also
have these large cocktails design
structures that are decorated and
performed in the carnival we call them
kings and queens of Carnival I Define
them as dancing sculptures and within
the carnival one of the craft practices
integral to the design and fermentation
of costumes and dancing sculptures like
these as we craft a wire bending bar
bending is a crop that combines elements
of engineering architecture and
sculpture to create structures like bees
it began in the 1930s and Carnival
and then it weiber fiberglass Rod skin
and other linear materials are bent and
shaped to create these structures for
performance these large artifacts or
these architectures are expressions of
creativity Innovation and technical
skills
uh this these are photos of expert where
I've been the student Derek performing
wire bending he has unfortunately since
passed away but this craft is at risk
and is dying due to dying and retiring
practitioners technocentric development
changing practices and because there's
Littleton load documentation of
knowledge in this craft for its
transmission
my work involves restoring remediating
and reconfiguring this craft practice
and its knowledges in carnival Arts by
continuing to focus on the sense of
community
at the carnival of foods
this is Albert Bailey and again Stephen
Derek to explain what happened as I
studied
and I studied them and their work to
create a language a language that
describes a craft of wire bending
they called it the daily direct grammar
and this language is two computationally
describes technical knowledge and wire
bending it's a series of drawings that
describe the steps in materials and
techniques in wire grading allowing
analysis of wire bending artifacts
transmission of this knowledge and
expertise for education and for practice
and this um what has been meaningful
hair is also the ability to teach and
pass this knowledge on to others so I
conduct workshops and you know to about
this craft this particular art and this
included art students and teachers in
Trinidad and Tobago and the architecture
students I teach them the daily direct
grammar that is technical knowledge
in wire bending how to use the grammar
not only to design and build artifacts
but how to use it to ask questions to
spec a link to explore to experiment and
then demonstrate a practical part of the
craft that is how to make bands how to
rotate one's wrist Etc
and what has been meaningful about this
has been the creation of a new
collaborative approach to the craft that
did not exist before currently while
abandoning is a singular practice with
one person to one artifact the grammar
opens it up with many people to one
artifact the fourth a collaborative
approach which does not exist currently
and appealing it to participants further
reinforcing the mentoring cooperation
and social interactions that's embedded
in making and incredible
drawing on this tradition that is part
of my culture I make artifacts and
architecture using techniques in wire
banding
these are photos of some of my
sculptures
um I love lines in this case I love
tangible light and intangible lines I
love the tectonics of materials as they
come together the interactions with
light Shadow and surfaces the artifact
is really not a big thing it's not the
final thing it's hold the artifact and
what we are the back revealed in its
interactions with life Shadow and
surfaces
the lines interactions with shadows
light surfaces and even itself so that
intrigues me
this is one of my pieces in Oasis
currently on exhibit at the uqem design
center in Montreal Canada
what's most meaningful about this is
that I'm able to share these histories
and cultures of design and making in
carnival while making these artifacts as
I think about them and as I share them
in addition to sculptures I also
experiment with the scrap that the
architectural scale by designing and
building Pavilions
this is a pavilion my students and I
built using techniques and wire bending
that same crop that's dying is Headroom
used to create architecture to create
new Poetics of construction highlighting
a local material a local material
practice a place and people
what's meaningful here is that this
Builds on this craft with traditional
and Technical technological knowledge to
revive crowd to provide collaboration
communal ways of making mentoring and
cooperating using the sculptural craft
but this second Pavilion project we
again use techniques and ways of making
and work bending at carnival to design
and build a structure that celebrates
cultures of making with accessible
materials and Technologies at hand okay
this will be made using fiberglass rods
and we call this an active painting
structure
[Music]
my last project I'll share with you is a
recent one launched just four weeks ago
it brings together machine learning
Heritage art architecture and culture
funded by the Mozilla Foundation uh the
the call was for projects examining the
effects of artificial intelligence or
racial Justice
opposition was that we wanted to use Ai
and machine learning to generate and
circulate black cultural heritage and
value we wanted to Showcase how our
creativity is tied to our history or
Liberation and our Innovations how our
expressions and art design and dance are
vehicles through which we have photo
oppression shared knowledge and shared
absolute Joy
my collaborators will Valencia James A
Dancer performer practitioner at the
intersection of Technology advance and
Katrina Chase Gaskins and artists
author and academic
our vision was an empowered creative
black and Caribbean community that
engage with learnables and interrogate
AI to benefit ourselves and to
contribute the global discourses on EI
through culture cultural practices of
and in carnival because we are already
implicated in decisions around Big Data
so remember I showed you all these uh
dancing sculptures earlier
for our project we are a project
involved creating a data set of hundreds
of images of the Arts and sculptures and
using style gun to generate new
imaginations new design possibilities
for
future other dancing sculptures what
might other dancing sculptures look like
when their data set is hundreds of
images of other dots and sculptures
these are some of the designs generated
from the network from that data set of
dance instructor
so these imaginations these imaginary
dances cultures are
um make us think about the possibilities
for not just design but construction
think about what stories they might tell
what histories they might tell and there
are possibilities that reconnect people
to their history and connect them to
possible fusions
foreign
is more than the generation of design
possibilities But it includes how we
showcase celebrate and extend Carnival
and aspects of Carnival using digital
tools and Technologies how do we reach
our publics touch the ground there are
several aspects of this product so I
encourage you to check it out but I'll
share just three parts of it uh the
virtual Gallery the virtual Juve and the
virtual Max
so I designed and model the architecture
for this Gallery built it in musical
hubs and the gallery showcases AI
generated dancing sculptures with audio
describing the wood and Carnival it also
encourages participation by those who
visit the gallery so I encourage you to
check it out
and this part of the exhibition includes
your children this showcases AI
generator job jobs and Blue Devils and
Jack molasses in the carnival again
there's audio describing the history of
Juve Carnival describing the exhibit
with video and the music curating the
feel of Jubilee with its scary beautiful
parts
these are some of the EI generated Blue
Devils and jobs and Julie
and in this virtual maths persons can
get a taste of what being in carnival is
like with stages to listen for super
music watch videos and images on camera
blocks
so I encourage you to check them all out
and what's meaningful about this project
is that persons outside the bubble of
Academia are artists and just people all
over the world anyone can get a taste of
what the carnival is about learn about
AI it can be used to teach persons about
Carnival and so much more
the case at which this project such as
the ground is also quick and accessible
uh persons can experience it on their
phone share it with others join or get
in these virtual spaces and meet others
and again affirm the sense of community
that's foundational to between that
Carnival I encourage you to check it out
and take some time I think we'll be
taking some time during the festival to
explore these spaces together uh signal
textbook and tell us
so these works I've shared with you are
meaningful because they create spaces
for participation by those who are
missing in foods of art architecture
Technology based work and more they
resist the segregation and privileging
of certain types of intelligences that
means not just technological intent
intelligences but craft culture using
the body and they amplify the stories of
historically excluded and marginalized
groups and their knowledges
and
with that I thank you very much
thank you very much Greener Festival
hi there
hi everybody we're back uh with Dorian
Rios and for now a Noel who you just
heard from
um Bernal when we met prior to the
festival you sent me the link to this
show and you asked me to write back to
you and tell you how it made me feel
um and I never wrote back to you but
I've been dying to tell you how it made
me feel
um and the the the word that I could the
best word I could describe was like
welcomed and included
um I think because when you walk in the
space you have this wonderful audio that
kind of walks you through explains
what's going on
um it's so vibrant it's so it's such a
joyful presentation
um and yeah I think that it was just so
fabulous to get to see that kind of you
know to see the machine's vision of what
of what Carnival might might look like
um I'd love to hear a little bit more
about this particular project and how
you got started working on it um what um
you know I mean prior to you know
started working with the Mozilla
Foundation
um you know what made you want to work
combine uh artificial intelligence with
with Carnival
um so
um so Carnival continues to fascinate me
right I find it so rich of everything
from art to design social issues
environmental political you name it so I
find it to be the seed of everything
good
um and everything
to ask questions with
um and
really it was about the call
um the trees send
um us this link of this call from
Mozilla where they wanted to look at
where they were the quotes around
artificial intelligence and racial
Justice
and of course you always find some way
to but what you do with what you want to
do
um and that was it really I
I knew I
um
generation of designs for dancing
sculptures for future types of meeting
and testing of making is something that
I you know I it's my work and so AI was
the topic and the methodology and so I
wanted to test that and what and what
the process was like what the results
might be what they might tell us
so it was just a matter of I think
combining a call and how we frame
um or frame around racial justice so
it's one of celebrating
um those who are excluded or creativity
and how we use our culture our practices
as a vehicle to teach us about these
tools that we are already implicated in
but that we are left out of when it
comes to developing them
I mean what's that I think that's
something that I wanted to ask you about
because you know oftentimes you know
we've heard we've heard talks you know
for instance from and dark yesterday and
she was talking about how racist
algorithmic search results once you see
them and they become materialized on
your on your screen it becomes somehow
more real and more impactful and more
damaging
um and you know it's it's really amazing
to see this technology which has been
used to exclude used to extract
um and use to otherwise obvious black
stories black voices
um you know you use it in a way that uh
the counteracts that in a lot of ways to
me and uh pushes back against
um that that Erasure
um and instead you know uses it to
expand the story
um and uh you know provide different
access points in
um I've been wondering how you know
through this practice
um and through this project you were
able to kind of uh turn those narratives
over about how the algorithm was working
either against or for you around
um and what it was like to to wrestle
with some of those things
I wouldn't say I'm
as yet
um wrestled with what the algorithm has
given given me given us
um I haven't
asked that question I haven't reflected
on the project in that we just did
um because it's more than the than what
the thing gives us but creating these
digital experiences and especially where
over the past two years many
communities countries we weren't able to
engage in carnival because of the
pandemic the cannibal is a real thing
people feel it in their Boons when
February is coming close right and so
that space for music for dance that
hasn't been there for two years and so
how do we and we as if they ask for
globally right
black white brown you name it how might
this platform with these digital
experiences via space reveal could meet
come together experience this thing that
might be new or not to us
um so it's really about the sharing
through this exploration but trying to
not necessarily simulate or replicate
Carnival but
um help us as we get through the next uh
the past two years without the space for
expression it is an expression it's
something that physically comes forward
from us how do we create a space for
that enjoyment
oh sorry
um I I was just thinking on how
also it feels like
I know when we when we talk about this
kind of processes that embed AI into
creating a series of so-called new
representations but actually he's just
you know uh reconfiguration of the
representations that we already have and
we have these and we create these data
sets that re-represent in order to
rethink
um let's say objects or events or people
or circumstances that are around us and
I and I kept on thinking how these
connect very well with uh with a with a
question that I've had probably for the
past five years which is like it is not
only about talking or pointing at the
the problems that we have When
developing or creating AI uh systems
right is also how do we make ourselves
visible there how do we represent
ourselves how do we share what surrounds
us our stories and our Traditions from
there and uh at least for me for
instance it was like well I know a
couple of Mexican artists that are
working with these processes but that
are not necessarily
um you know we're connecting with the
local stories as such just with certain
representations of what it means
apparently to be Mexican right which is
something that is well I don't know
crazy to create just like a super
abstraction of it but um but I really
really enjoyed what I really enjoyed
about your artwork is that
it is not intended to reduce something
or to make it uh let's say super legible
uh unlike these projects right I think
that what he's doing is expanding those
stories and bringing that to the present
but also to the Future how are we gonna
be uh taking this into the future right
and what can we keep or what should be
uh you know like placed within the
conversation that is actually important
and which things need to change as well
and
um I don't know I think a lot about you
know science fiction
um writers or such as like uh or caviar
Butler for instance who was very strong
about like well you know if we do not
write the stories where we put ourselves
there and we do not represent ourselves
there no one is gonna do that for us as
tough as that sounds and uh and I think
that is something that is very strong in
your work and um and I just wanted to
hear a little bit more about that
expansion into the present but also into
the future or how you envision these
um within within your practice let's say
generally speaking as well
sure
um I meanwhile the arena I think I I
want you to describe my project from now
on
um so I so in terms of the sort of
future thinking of it I think of it
through
um or making practices
um or education
and
our
celebration of how our expressions of
creativity continue to be a free will
for us if you will for change
um how
especially as as an educator these very
abstract
dematerialized ways of engaging in it
could be architecture it could be
computation programming these very
abstract ways of thinking that separate
us from our emotions
that's not because that I come from
right and and making spaces where people
who understand the world through dancing
through music through all of these
voices of art that that too is valid and
this sterilization of knowledge and
sterilization of what is digital
knowledge or what's a data set is not
the only way and it should not this kind
this Erasure of people's histories I
think is is what I'm trying to push back
against in in my work
um
that is unkind to erase people's
histories
um it's violence to raise people's
histories and stories new stories get
told
without that context and the Very people
who created these practices are they're
no longer there in those stories and and
that they are on the ground
repercussions to these things right
um and so it's about
you know highlighting how wonderful that
I lead too okay we all know it's
wonderful but I think showing other
possibilities for how we might think
screw and ask questions about technology
ask questions about ourselves ask
questions about Society uh get into the
nitty-gritties of the material
materialities of not just crowd
practices but Technologies
um through these practices and continue
the processes of making these costumes
dancing Scout Tales technological
artifacts that we can tell our stories
to others and question those histories
and question voices just create in space
for conversation and debate
foreign
I I wanted to dig in a little bit more
into this
um and because I think you know this
Festival is rolling protocol and we're
really trying to rethink ways that the
world around us is constructed and ways
that we might be able to repurpose
things that are harmful or
um you know write new ones and I'm
wondering you know
um you know in thinking about this
expansion into the future
um that you were just describing
um you know what other ways can you know
we as users of Technology of people who
are of as people who are subjected to
the layers of software that permeate our
society you know what can we do you know
within that context to to to push back
or to repurpose these these harmful uh
techniques tools Technologies and
methodologies
when we um
yeah this semester I instead of quick
workshop with some students around Ai
and design and an important part of it
was for students to
because as Architects right I'm teaching
architecture students we just use tools
that we get right any company drops a
tool use it without questioning the tool
without understanding the infrastructure
the power behind those tools and I I
once wanted students to be aware of that
like who are these people making these
tools what is the history of these tools
like
when you visual easily landscape of who
is making these tools and understanding
the
histories of these Technologies
it's a way for us to frame and ask
ourselves
how we use these tools why we use these
tools what it says that these tools have
been developed and we continue to use
them without questioning them and
questioning or like you have Benjamin
would say always reimagining other
possibilities right
um
shedding light on the faces
and the money behind these
infrastructures I think is important for
us to do for all tools that we use
so that we understand
that that person is not just that too
like a a tool is a is a is a a volume
it's a fairy it's a way of seeing the
world we make something into the way you
see the world and if you're making tools
that are exclusive and exclude people
it's a way that you see
um and so my take on it would really be
to dig into the histories of these tools
develop your own
um
because there are no huge behemoths that
that take from us they continue to be
extracted right
um
just just do the work nowadays
unfortunately we have to do the work
it's not we can't not do the work our
the work of generations after me
unfortunately is the amount of work that
people have to do frankly
um but we have to really work we have to
do this
all interfaces are political and
cultural interfaces simultaneously
you see I I need to rendering I need you
in my life
I need you in my life
you know what for now
like almost every day
um but um you know in in interesting so
earlier today we were talking to Jeremy
quiard who's a game designer and a
visual artist
um among other things and he was talking
about working in game spaces kind of
like a collaboration with the software
and in so many ways I think that the
kind of generative artificial
intelligence work like these images in
in the in the project
um you know really represent a kind of
uh a kind of collaboration in a way and
I was wondering if that's something that
resonates with you
um and if so what was that experience
like of collaborating with with the
algorithm to produce to produce these
images
yeah so I would agree and Valencia James
who I know is in gray area and it was on
the project too she always has you know
AI has a creative partner right
um and so I I do you know it's a
creative part up but my for example
those images that I generated my work
was beyond that meaning I want to
attempt to make these things to ask her
the questions about materials techniques
Etc so it's more that individual but you
know and my mind I have to make this for
the question to become
um but the
for the set of results from it
like it it didn't you know my student
was working with me on it and we we had
no idea what it would be and it blew us
away right so it was
almost dreamlike
exciting
it was just way cool
um and beautiful you know
um it was recognizable some things
looked real some things they sort of
ghostly images of some of them really
you're asking what is this what might it
be what can it be
um so it's exciting it definitely was
exciting yeah for sure that's so that's
so it's so much fun especially you know
I like working with you know with code
based uh and you know work because you
know it it's always a little bit of a
surprise every time and there's a little
bit of there's some there's some kind of
Wonder that's embedded in that that I
think you know makes it a really
enjoyable process
um
I wanted to you know we don't have a ton
of time left but I just wanted to ask
you a little bit you know I know that
you you know work
um you know you work with the uh the
situation comp the situated computation
Design Lab um at Georgia Tech and I was
wondering if you could tell us a little
bit about kind of what does that term
situated computation mean
um and what's what uh what kind of work
are you are you doing there
sure so
um currently I'm in Stuttgart I'm in
Germany until December but when I I get
back to
um Georgia Tech
um
ideally the lab which I still will be
setting up when I get that
um we work around two situated
competitions is about questions the
tools and Technologies like I just
mentioned or field uh in which all
Technologies involved that it asks that
we not remain ignorant of social and
political structures that shape the
tools and the methods that we use in art
using design Etc right so not pretending
that oh it's just a tool to draw with no
these things are as Doreen just
beautifully said social and political
tools in the world right theories ideas
about use
um and so in in my research lab the goal
is to of course think through these
things by making whether it be making
Technologies making artifacts making
processes uh questioning education and
design education how we educate when it
comes to these Technologies uh how we
eat educate our publics that being those
outside the academic bubble
um and how we
um think through societies and how we
are implicated in these Technologies
again being critical of our field our
work and not just the passive users of
things that are made for us
um without
um
really engaging like the way in 2021 and
it's it's hard to not and to not engage
and grab these real things of social of
social issues
um so yeah we're doing everything we're
having fun we're doing Carnival we're
doing architecture we're doing we're
learning all the way and asking I think
was some questions
absolutely and I don't know I just love
that I love that term situated
computation and I you know
um it I just think that you're thinking
about how we are as situated within a
system feels like such a productive way
of you know thinking about the world
around us
um and it feels so much more connected
to all we know we're really you know in
thinking about interconnectedness and
interdependence because we're all
interdependent in one way or another
um and it you know this feels like a a
toolkit that can allow for again yeah
more productive uh thinking through the
complexity of of our situations
um and those selves like we're we're
individuals we're communities we are no
we aren't there is no unique blue cell
description from us all
um and we have to do the work of getting
to know deeply things so that we could
make you know price wise decisions and
have good conversations rather than
making things that
are you know a Band-Aid to solve many
problems but cause more problems
wow Vernell it has been so amazing to
have you it's been so much fun to
explore the rooms in those little hubs
the audience you can go to
carnival.ai.com to learn more and
experience this uh take some screenshots
to let them know how it makes you feel
there's some cool ways that you can
participate and join the conversation
um and
um yeah let us know what you think let
us know how it makes you feel
um
thank you so much thank you so much for
having me great area I appreciate this
so much thank you
and thank you for calling in from
Germany I thought I didn't realize that
you were in Europe I realized it's super
late
yeah so thank you for calling in so late
at night we really appreciate it thank
you so much